# NoFAS
Variational Inference with NoFAS: Normalizing Flow with Adaptive Surrogate for Computationally Expensive Models

NoFAS estimates the posterior distribution of hidden variables for a computationally expensive model using normalizing 
flow with an adaptive surrogate. In particular, masked autoregressive flow (MAF) and RealNVP are used in the code, which are 
implemented by [Kamen Bliznashki](https://github.com/kamenbliznashki/normalizing_flows). 
The code includes four numerical experiments: closed form mapping, RC, RCR, and non-isomorphic Sobol function.
RC and RCR are implemented by [the Schiavazzi Lab at the University of Notre Dame](https://github.com/desResLab/supplMatHarrod20).

## Paper
The methodology and the numerical examples are discussed in the paper:
Y. Wang, F. Liu and D.E. Schiavazzi, *[Variational Inference with NoFAS: Normalizing Flow with Adaptive Surrogate for Computationally Expensive Models]()*

## Requirements:
* PyTorch 1.4.0
* Numpy 1.19.2
* Scipy 1.6.1

## Usage
* __run experiment__: Execute run_experiment.py by
```bash
python run_experiment.py
```
* __Surrogate Model__ - If surrogate models are enabled, `.npz` and `.sur` files containing surrogate information must be put in the 
  root directory. As a reference, surrogate model files for the four experiments are stored in `/source/surrogate`. 
  New surrogate models can be generated by calling the `gen_grid` and `surrogate_save` methods in `FNN_surrogate_nested.py`.
* __Results__ - Posterior samples for the latent variables are stored in `/result` but they are transformed with respect to the original units. They can 
be converted back to their original units by calling the `transform` method in the files containing the model implementation.
* __Metropolis Hastings__ - This method is implemented in `mh.py` which also contains testing functions designed for the four
experiments in the paper.

  
## Recommended Hyperparameters
All experiments used RMSprop as the optimizer equipped exponential decay scheduler with decay factor 0.9999. All normalizing flows use ReLU activations and 
maximum number of iterations is 25001. All MADE autoencoders contain 1 hidden layer with 100 nodes.

| Experiment  | NF type | NF layers | batch size | budget | updating size | updating period | learning rate |
| ----------- | ------- | --------- | ---------- | ------ | ------------- | --------------- | ------------- |
| closed form | RealNVP | 5         | 200        | 64     | 2             | 1000            | 0.002         |
| RC          | MAF     | 5         | 250        | 64     | 2             | 1000            | 0.003         |
| RCR         | MAF     | 5         | 500        | 216    | 2             | 300             | 0.003         |
| 5-dim       | RealNVP | 15        | 250        | 1023   | 12            | 250             | 0.0005        |
